1. A molecule with the formula AB3 has a trigonal pyramidal geometry.How many electron groups are on the central atom (A)?2. A molecule with the formula AB3 has a trigonal planar geometry.How many electron groups are on the central atom?3. For each molecular geometry, determine the number of totalelectron groups, the number of bonding groups, and the numberof lone pairs on the central atom.
4. For each molecular geometry, determine the number of totalelectron groups, the number of bonding groups, and the numberof lone pairs on the central atom.
5. Determine the electron geometry, molecular geometry, and idealizedbond angles for each molecule. In which cases do youexpect deviations from the idealized bond angle?a. PF3 b. SBr2 c. CHCl3 d. CS2
6. Determine the electron geometry, molecular geometry, and idealizedbond angles for each molecule. In which cases do youexpect deviations from the idealized bond angle?a. CF4 b. NF3c. OF2 d. H2S7. Which species has the smaller bond angle, H3O+ or H2O?Explain.8. Which species has the smaller bond angle, ClO4- or ClO3-?Explain.9. Determine the molecular geometry and make a sketch ofeach molecule or ion using the bond conventions shown in“Representing Molecular Geometries on Paper” inSection 10.4.a. SF4 b. ClF3c. IF2- d. IBr4-10. Determine the molecular geometry and make a sketch ofeach molecule or ion using the bond conventions shown in“Representing Molecular Geometries on Paper” inSection 10.4.a. BrF5b. SCl6c. PF5d. IF4+11. Determine the molecular geometry of each interior atom andmake a sketch of each molecule.a. C2H2 (skeletal structure HCCH)b. C2H4 (skeletal structure H2CCH2)c. C2H6 (skeletal structure H3CCH3)12. Determine the molecular geometry of each interior atom andmake a sketch of each molecule.a. N2b. N2H2 (skeletal structure HNNH)c. N2H4 (skeletal structure H2NNH2)13. Each ball-and-stick model shows the electron and moleculargeometry of a generic molecule. Explain what is wrong witheach molecular geometry and provide the correct moleculargeometry, given the number of lone pairs and bonding groupson the central atom.
14. Each ball-and-stick model shows the electron and moleculargeometry of a generic molecule. Explain what is wrong witheach molecular geometry and provide the correct moleculargeometry, given the number of lone pairs and bonding groupson the central atom.
15. Determine the geometry about each interior atom in each moleculeand sketch the molecule. (Skeletal structure is indicatedin parentheses.)a. CH3OH (H3COH)b. CH3OCH3 (H3COCH3)c. H2O2 (HOOH)16. Determine the geometry about each interior atom in each moleculeand sketch the molecule. (Skeletal structure is indicatedin parentheses.)a. CH3NH2 (H3CNH2)b. CH3CO2CH3 (H3CCOOCH3 both O atoms attached tosecond C)c. NH2CO2H (H2NCOOH both O atoms attached to C)
17. Explain why CO2 and CCl4 are both nonpolar, even thoughthey contain polar bonds.18. CH3F is a polar molecule, even though the tetrahedral geometryoften leads to nonpolar molecules. Explain.19. Determine whether each molecule in Problem 5 is polar ornonpolar.20. Determine whether each molecule in Problem 6 is polar ornonpolar.21. Determine whether each molecule is polar or nonpolar.a. SCl2b. SCl4c. BrCl522. Determine whether each molecule is polar or nonpolar.a. SiCl4b. CF2Cl2c. SeF6d. IF5
23. The valence electron configurations of several atoms areshown here. How many bonds can each atom make withouthybridization?a. Be 2s2b. P 3s23p3c. F 2s22p524. The valence electron configurations of several atoms areshown here. How many bonds can each atom make withouthybridization?a. B 2s22p1b. N 2s22p3c. O 2s22p4
25. Write orbital diagrams (boxes with arrows in them) to representthe electron configurations—without hybridization—forall the atoms in PH3. Circle the electrons involved in bonding.Draw a three-dimensional sketch of the molecule and showorbital overlap. What bond angle do you expect from the unhybridizedorbitals? Does valence bond theory agree with theexperimentally measured bond angle of 93.3°?26. Write orbital diagrams (boxes with arrows in them) to representthe electron configurations—without hybridization—forall the atoms in SF2. Circle the electrons involved in bonding.Draw a three-dimensional sketch of the molecule andshow orbital overlap. What bond angle do you expect fromthe unhybridized orbitals? Does valence bond theory agreewith the experimentally measured bond angle of 98.2°?
27. Write orbital diagrams (boxes with arrows in them) to representthe electron configuration of carbon before and after sp3hybridization.28. Write orbital diagrams (boxes with arrows in them) to representthe electron configurations of carbon before and after sphybridization.29. Which hybridization scheme allows the formation of at leastone p bond?sp3, sp2, sp3d230. Which hybridization scheme allows the central atom to formmore than four bonds?sp3, sp3d, sp2
31. Write a hybridization and bonding scheme for each molecule.Sketch each molecule, including overlapping orbitals, andlabel all bonds using the notation shown in Examples 10.6and 10.7.a. CCl4 b. NH3c. OF2 d. CO232. Write a hybridization and bonding scheme for each molecule.Sketch each molecule, including overlapping orbitals, andlabel all bonds using the notation shown in Examples 10.6and 10.7.a. CH2Br2b. SO2c. NF3d. BF333. Write a hybridization and bonding scheme for each moleculeor ion. Sketch the structure, including overlapping orbitals, andlabel all bonds using the notation shown in Examples 10.6and 10.7.a. COCl2 (carbon is the central atom)b. BrF5c. XeF2d. I3-34. Write a hybridization and bonding scheme for each molecule orion. Sketch the structure, including overlapping orbitals, and labelall bonds using the notation shown in Examples 10.6 and 10.7.a. SO32-b. PF6-c. BrF3d. HCN
35. Write a hybridization and bonding scheme for each moleculecontaining more than one interior atom. Indicate the hybridizationabout each interior atom. Sketch the structure, includingoverlapping orbitals, and label all bonds using the notationshown in Examples 10.6 and 10.7.a. N2H2 (skeletal structure HNNH)b. N2H4 (skeletal structure H2NNH2)c. CH3NH2 (skeletal structure H3CNH2)36. Write a hybridization and bonding scheme for each moleculecontaining more than one interior atom. Indicate the hybridizationabout each interior atom. Sketch the structure, includingoverlapping orbitals, and label all bonds using the notationshown in Examples 10.6 and 10.7.a. C2H2 (skeletal structure HCCH)b. C2H4 (skeletal structure H2CCH2)c. C2H6 (skeletal structure H3CCH3)
37. Consider the structure of the amino acid alanine. Indicate thehybridization about each interior atom.
38. Consider the structure of the amino acid aspartic acid. Indicatethe hybridization about each interior atom.
39. Sketch the bonding molecular orbital that results from the linearcombination of two 1s orbitals. Indicate the region whereinterference occurs and state the kind of interference (constructiveor destructive).40. Sketch the antibonding molecular orbital that results from thelinear combination of two 1s orbitals. Indicate the regionwhere interference occurs and state the kind of interference(constructive or destructive).41. Draw an MO energy diagram and predict the bond order ofBe2+ and Be2-. Do you expect these molecules to exist in thegas phase?42. Draw an MO energy diagram and predict the bond order ofLi2+ and Li2-. Do you expect these molecules to exist in thegas phase?43. Sketch the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals thatresult from linear combinations of the 2px atomic orbitals in ahomonuclear diatomic molecule. (The 2px orbitals’ lobes areoriented along the bonding axis.)44. Sketch the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals that resultfrom linear combinations of the 2pz atomic orbitals in a homonucleardiatomic molecule. (The 2pz orbitals’ lobes are oriented perpendicularto the bonding axis.) How do these molecular orbitalsdiffer from those obtained from linear combinations of the 2pyatomic orbitals? (The 2py orbitals are oriented perpendicular to thebonding axis, but also perpendicular to the 2pz orbitals.)
45. Using the molecular orbital energy ordering for second-rowhomonuclear diatomic molecules in which the p2p orbitals lieat lower energy than the s2p, draw MO energy diagrams andpredict the bond order in a molecule or ion with each numberof total valence electrons. Is the molecule or ion diamagneticor paramagnetic?a. 4 b. 6 c. 8 d. 946. Using the molecular orbital energy ordering for second-rowhomonuclear diatomic molecules in which the p2p orbitals lieat higher energy than the s2p, draw MO energy diagrams andpredict the bond order in a molecule or ion with each numberof total valence electrons. Is the molecule or ion diamagneticor paramagnetic?a. 10 b. 12 c. 13 d. 14
47. Use molecular orbital theory to predict whether or not eachmolecule or ion exists in a relatively stable form.a. H22- b. Ne2 c. He22+ d. F22-48. Use molecular orbital theory to predict whether or not eachmolecule or ion exists in a relatively stable form.a. C22+ b. Li2 c. Be22+ d. Li22-49. According to MO theory, which molecule or ion has the highestbond order? Highest bond energy? Shortest bond length?C2, C2+, C2-50. According to MO theory, which molecule or ion has the highestbond order? Highest bond energy? Shortest bond length?O2, O2-, O22-
51. For each compound, draw an appropriate Lewis structure,determine the geometry using VSEPR theory, determinewhether the molecule is polar, identify the hybridization of allinterior atoms, and make a sketch of the molecule, accordingto valence bond theory, showing orbital overlap.a. COF2 (carbon is the central atom)b. S2Cl2 (ClSSCl)c. SF452. For each compound, draw an appropriate Lewis structure,determine the geometry using VSEPR theory, determinewhether the molecule is polar, identify the hybridization of allinterior atoms, and make a sketch of the molecule, accordingto valence bond theory, showing orbital overlap.a. IF5 b. CH2CHCH3 c. CH3SH53. Amino acids are biological compounds that link together toform proteins, the workhorse molecules in living organisms.The skeletal structures of several simple amino acids areshown here. For each skeletal structure, complete the Lewisstructure, determine the geometry and hybridization about eachinterior atom, and make a sketch of the molecule, using thebond conventions of Section 10.4.
54. The genetic code is based on four different bases with thestructures shown here. Assign a geometry and hybridization toeach interior atom in these four bases.a. cytosine b. adenine c. thymine d. guanine
55. The structure of caffeine, present in coffee and many softdrinks, is shown here. How many pi bonds are present in caffeine?How many sigma bonds? Insert the lone pairs in themolecule. What kinds of orbitals do the lone pairs occupy?
56. The structure of acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) is shown here.How many pi bonds are present in acetylsalicylic acid? Howmany sigma bonds? Which parts of the molecule are free torotate? Which parts are rigid?
57. Most vitamins can be classified either as fat soluble, which means that they tend to accumulatein the body (so that taking too much can be harmful), or water soluble, whichmeans that they tend to be quickly eliminated from the body in urine. Examine the structuralformula and space-filling model for each vitamin shown here and determine whethereach one is fat soluble (mostly nonpolar) or water soluble (mostly polar).
58. Water does not easily remove grease from dishes or handsbecause grease is nonpolar and water is polar. The addition ofsoap to water, however, allows the grease to dissolve. Look atthe structure of sodium stearate (a soap) shown here and suggesthow it works.
59. Bromine can form compounds or ions with any number offluorine atoms from one to five. Write the formulas of all fiveof these species, assign a hybridization, and describe theirelectron and molecular geometries.60. The compound C3H4 has two double bonds. Describe its bondingand geometry, using a valence bond approach.61. Draw the Lewis structure of a molecule with the formulaC4H6Cl2 that has a dipole moment of 0.62. Indicate which orbitals overlap to form the sigma bonds in:(a) BeBr2, (b) HgCl2, (c) ICN.
