1. Write an electron configuration for N. Then write the Lewissymbol for N and show which electrons from the electron configurationare included in the Lewis symbol.2. Write an electron configuration for Ne. Then write the Lewissymbol for Ne and show which electrons from the electronconfiguration are included in the Lewis symbol.
3. Write the Lewis symbol for each atom or ion.a. Al b. Na+c. Cl d. Cl-
4. Write the Lewis symbol for each atom or ion.a. S2- b. Mgc. Mg2+ d. P
5. Write the Lewis symbols that represent the ions in each ioniccompound.a. NaF b. CaO c. SrBr2 d. K2O6. Write the Lewis symbols that represent the ions for each ioniccompound.a. SrO b. Li2S c. CaI2 d. RbF7. Use the Lewis model to determine the formula for the compoundthat forms between:a. Sr and Se b. Ba and Clc. Na and S d. Al and O8. Use the Lewis model to determine the formula for thecompound that forms between:a. Ca and N b. Mg and Ic. Ca and S d. Cs and F9. Explain the trend in the lattice energies of the alkaline earthmetal oxides.
10. Rubidium iodide has a lattice energy of -617 kJ>mol, whilepotassium bromide has a lattice energy of -671 kJ>mol. Whyis the lattice energy of potassium bromide more exothermicthan the lattice energy of rubidium iodide?11. The lattice energy of CsF is -744 kJ>mol, whereas that ofBaO is -3029 kJ>mol. Explain this large difference in latticeenergy.12. Arrange these substances in order of increasing magnitude oflattice energy: KCl, SrO, RbBr, CaO.
13. Use covalent Lewis structures to explain why each element (orfamily of elements) occurs as diatomic molecules.a. hydrogen b. the halogensc. oxygen d. nitrogen14. Use covalent Lewis structures to explain why the compoundthat forms between nitrogen and hydrogen has the formulaNH3. Show why NH2 and NH4 are not stable.15. Write the Lewis structure for each molecule.a. PH3 b. SCl2 c. HI d. CH416. Write the Lewis structure for each molecule.a. NF3 b. HBr c. SBr2 d. CCl417. Determine if the bond between each pair of atoms is purecovalent, polar covalent, or ionic.a. Br and Br b. C and Cl c. C and S d. Sr and O18. Determine if the bond between each pair of atoms is purecovalent, polar covalent, or ionic.a. C and N b. N and S c. K and F d. N and N19. Draw the Lewis structure for CO with an arrow representingthe dipole moment. Refer to Figure 9.9 to estimate the percentionic character of the CO bond.20. Draw the Lewis structure for BrF with an arrow representingthe dipole moment. Refer to Figure 9.9 to estimate the percentionic character of the BrF bond.
21. Write the Lewis structure for each molecule or ion.a. CI4 b. N2O c. SiH4 d. Cl2COe. H3COH f. OH- g. BrO-22. Write a Lewis structure for each molecule or ion.a. N2H2 b. N2H4 c. C2H2 d. C2H4e. H3COCH3 f. CN- g. NO2-23. Write the Lewis structure that obeys the octet rule for eachmolecule or ion. Include resonance structures if necessary andassign formal charges to each atom.a. SeO2 b. CO32- c. ClO- d. NO2-24. Write the Lewis structure that obeys the octet rule for each ion.Include resonance structures if necessary and assign formalcharges to each atom.a. ClO3- b. ClO4- c. NO3- d. NH4+25. Use formal charge to determine which of the two Lewisstructures shown here is better.
26. Use formal charge to determine which of the two Lewisstructures shown here is better.
27. How important is the resonance structure shown here to theoverall structure of carbon dioxide? Explain your answer.
28. In N2O, nitrogen is the central atom and the oxygen atom isterminal. In OF2, however, oxygen is the central atom. Use formalcharges to explain this.29. Draw the Lewis structure (including resonance structures) forthe acetate ion 1CH3COO- 2. For each resonance structure,assign formal charges to all atoms that have formal charge.30. Draw the Lewis structure (including resonance structures) formethyl azide 1CH3N32. For each resonance structure, assignformal charges to all atoms that have formal charge.31. What are the formal charges of the atoms shown in red?
32. What are the formal charges of the atoms shown in red?
33. Write the Lewis structure for each molecule.a. BCl3 b. NO2 c. BH334. Write the Lewis structure for each molecule.a. BBr3 b. NO c. ClO2
35. Write the Lewis structure for each ion. Include resonancestructures if necessary and assign formal charges to all atoms.If necessary, expand the octet on the central atom to lowerformal charge.a. PO43- b. CN- c. SO32- d. ClO2-36. Write the Lewis structure for each molecule or ion. Includeresonance structures if necessary and assign formal charges toall atoms. If necessary, expand the octet on the central atom tolower formal charge.a. SO42- b. HSO4-c. SO3 d. BrO2-37. Write a Lewis structure for each molecule or ion. Useexpanded octets as necessary.a. PF5 b. I3- c. SF4 d. GeF438. Write the Lewis structure for each molecule or ion. Useexpanded octets as necessary.a. ClF5 b. AsF6- c. Cl3PO d. IF5
39. Consider these three compounds: HCCH, H2CCH2, H3CCH3.Order these compounds in order of increasing carbon–carbonbond strength and in order of decreasing carbon–carbon bondlength.40. Which of the two compounds shown here has the strongernitrogen–nitrogen bond? The shorter nitrogen–nitrogen bond?H2NNH2, HNNH41. Hydrogenation reactions add hydrogen across double bonds inhydrocarbons and other organic compounds. Use average bondenergies to calculate ΔHrxn for this hydrogenation reaction.H2C“CH2(g) + H2(g) S H3C¬CH3(g)42. Ethanol is a fuel we may use as a possible energy source in thefuture. Use average bond energies to calculate ΔHrxn for thecombustion of ethanol.CH3CH2OH(g) + 3 O2(g) S 2 CO2(g) + 3 H2O(g)
43. Write the Lewis structure for each compound. Make certain todistinguish between ionic and covalent compounds.a. BI3 b. K2S c. HCFO d. PBr344. Write the Lewis structure for each compound. Make certain todistinguish between ionic and covalent compounds.a. Al2O3 b. ClF5 c. MgI2 d. XeO445. Each of these compounds contains both ionic and covalentbonds. Write ionic Lewis structures for each, including thecovalent structure for the ion in brackets. Write resonancestructures if necessary.a. BaCO3 b. Ca(OH)2 c. KNO3 d. LiIO46. Each of these compounds contains both ionic and covalentbonds. Write ionic Lewis structures for each of them, includingthe covalent structure for the ion in brackets. Write resonancestructures if necessary.a. RbIO2 b. NH4Cl c. KOH d. Sr(CN)247. Carbon ring structures are common in organic chemistry. Drawthe Lewis structure for each carbon ring structure, includingany necessary resonance structures.a. C4H8 b. C4H4 c. C6H12 d. C6H648. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins. The simplestamino acid is glycine (H2NCH2COOH). Draw the Lewis structurefor glycine. (Hint: The central atoms in the skeletal structureare nitrogen bonded with carbon, which is bonded toanother carbon. The two oxygen atoms are bonded directly tothe rightmost carbon atom.)49. Formic acid is responsible for the sting of biting ants. By mass,formic acid is 26.10% C, 4.38% H, and 69.52% O. The molarmass of formic acid is 46.02 g>mol. Find the molecular formulaof formic acid and draw its Lewis structure.50. Diazomethane is a highly poisonous, explosive compoundbecause it readily reacts to form gaseous nitrogen as a product.Diazomethane has the following composition by mass: 28.57%C; 4.80% H; and 66.64% N. The molar mass of diazomethaneis 42.04 g>mol. Find the molecular formula of diazomethane,draw its Lewis structure, and assign formal charges to eachatom. Explain why diazomethane is not very stable.
51. The reaction of Fe2O3(s) with Al(s) to form Al2O3(s) and Fe(s)is called the thermite reaction and is highly exothermic. Whatrole does lattice energy play in the exothermicity of thereaction?52. NaCl has a lattice energy of -787 kJ>mol. Consider a hypotheticalsalt XY. X3+ has the same radius as Na+ and Y3- hasthe same radius as Cl-. Estimate the lattice energy of XY.53. Draw the Lewis structure for nitric acid (the hydrogen atom isattached to one of the oxygen atoms). Include all three resonancestructures by alternating the double bond among thethree oxygen atoms. Use formal charge to determine whichresonance structure is most important to the structure ofnitric acid.54. Phosgene (Cl2CO) is a poisonous gas that was used as a chemicalweapon during World War I and is a potential agent forchemical terrorism. Draw the Lewis structure of phosgene.Include all three resonance forms by alternating the doublebond among the three terminal atoms. Which resonance structureis the best?55. The cyanate ion (OCN-) and the fulminate ion (CNO-) sharethe same three atoms but have vastly different properties. Thecyanate ion is stable, while the fulminate ion is unstable andforms explosive compounds. The resonance structures of thecyanate ion were explored in Example 9.8. Draw the Lewisstructure for the fulminate ion—including possible resonanceforms—and use formal charge to explain why the fulminate ionis less stable (and therefore more reactive) than the cyanate ion.56. Use Lewis structures to explain why Br3- and I3- are stable,while F3- is not.57. Draw the Lewis structure for each organic compound from itscondensed structural formula.a. C3H8 b. CH3OCH3 c. CH3COCH3d. CH3COOH e. CH3CHO58. Draw the Lewis structure for each organic compound from itscondensed structural formula.a. C2H4 b. CH3NH2 c. HCHOd. CH3CH2OH e. HCOOH
59. Draw the Lewis structure for HCSNH2. (The carbon and nitrogenatoms are bonded together, and the sulfur atom is bondedto the carbon atom.) Label each bond in the molecule as polaror nonpolar.60. Draw the Lewis structure for urea, H2NCONH2, the compoundprimarily responsible for the smell of urine. (The central carbonatom is bonded to both nitrogen atoms and to the oxygenatom.) Does urea contain polar bonds? Which bond in urea ismost polar?61. Some theories of aging suggest that free radicals cause certaindiseases and perhaps aging in general. According to the Lewismodel, such odd-electron species molecules are not chemicallystable and will quickly react with other molecules. Free radicalsmay react with molecules in the cell, such as DNA, attackingthem and causing cancer or other diseases. Free radicalsmay also attack molecules on the surfaces of cells, makingthem appear foreign to the body’s immune system. Theimmune system then attacks the cells and destroys them, weakeningthe body. Draw the Lewis structures for each free radicalimplicated in this theory of aging.a. O2- b. O- c. OHd. CH3OO (unpaired electron on terminal oxygen)62. Free radicals are important in many environmentally significantreactions. For example, photochemical smog—smog thatforms as a result of the action of sunlight on air pollutants—isformed in part by two steps:NO2UV light NO + OO + O2 O3The product of this reaction, ozone, is a pollutant in the loweratmosphere. (Upper atmospheric ozone is a natural part of theatmosphere that protects life on Earth from ultraviolet light.)Ozone is an eye and lung irritant and also accelerates theweathering of rubber products. Rewrite the above reactions using the Lewis structure of each reactant and product. Identify the free radicals.
63. If hydrogen were used as a fuel, it could be burned accordingto the reaction shown here.H2(g) +12O2(g) S H2O(g)Use average bond energies to calculate ΔHrxn for this reactionand also for the combustion of methane (CH4). Which fuelyields more energy per mole? Per gram?64. Calculate ΔHrxn for the combustion of octane (C8H18), a componentof gasoline, by using average bond energies and thencalculate it again using enthalpies of formation fromAppendix IIA. What is the percent difference between the tworesults? Which result would you expect to be more accurate?65. Draw the Lewis structure for each compound.a. Cl2O7 (no Cl¬Cl bond)b. H3PO3 (two OH bonds)c. H3AsO466. The azide ion, N3-, is a symmetrical ion, all of whose contributingstructures have formal charges. Draw three importantcontributing Lewis structures for this ion.67. List the gas-phase ion pairs shown here in order of the quantityof energy released when they form from separated gas-phaseions. Start with the pair that releases the least energy.Na+F-, Mg2+F-, Na+O2-, Mg2+O2-, Al3+O2-68. Calculate ΔH° for the reaction H2(g) + Br2(g) S 2 HBr(g)using bond energy values. The ΔH °f of HBr(g) is not equal toone-half of the value calculated. Account for the difference.69. A compound composed of only carbon and hydrogen is7.743% hydrogen by mass. Propose a Lewis structure for thecompound.70. A compound composed of only carbon and chlorine is 85.5%chlorine by mass. Propose a Lewis structure for the compound.


