1. Write full electron configurations for each element.a. P b. C c. Na d. Ar2. Write full electron configurations for each element.a. O b. Si c. Ne d. K3. Write full orbital diagrams for each element.a. N b. F c. Mg d. Al4. Write full orbital diagrams for each element.a. S b. Ca c. Ne d. He5. Use the periodic table to write the electron configuration foreach element. Represent core electrons with the symbol of theprevious noble gas in brackets.a. P b. Ge c. Zr d. I6. Use the periodic table to determine the element correspondingto each electron configuration.a. 3Ar4 4s23d104p6b. 3Ar4 4s23d2c. 3Kr4 5s24d105p2d. 3Kr4 5s2
7. Use the periodic table to determine each quantity.a. The number of 2s electrons in Lib. The number of 3d electrons in Cuc. The number of 4p electrons in Brd. The number of 4d electrons in Zr8. Use the periodic table to determine each quantity.a. The number of 3s electrons in Mgb. The number of 3d electrons in Crc. The number of 4d electrons in Yd. The number of 6p electrons in Pb9. Name an element in the fourth period (row) of the periodictable with:a. five valence electrons b. four 4p electronsc. three 3d electrons d. a complete outer shell10. Name an element in the third period (row) of the periodic tablewith:a. three valence electronsb. four 3p electronsc. six 3p electronsd. two 3s electrons and no 3p electrons
11. Determine the number of valence electrons in each element.a. Ba b. Cs c. Ni d. S12. Determine the number of valence electrons for each element.Which elements do you expect to lose electrons in their chemicalreactions? Which do you expect to gain electrons?a. Al b. Sn c. Br d. Se13. Which outer electron configuration would you expect tobelong to a reactive metal? To a reactive nonmetal?a. ns2 b. ns2 np6 c. ns2 np5 d. ns2 np214. Which outer electron configuration would you expect tobelong to a noble gas? To a metalloid?a. ns2 b. ns2 np6 c. ns2 np5 d. ns2 np2
15. According to Coulomb’s law, which pair of charged particleshas the lowest potential energy?a. A particle with a 1- charge separated by 150 pm from aparticle with a 2+ chargeb. A particle with a 1- charge separated by 150 pm from aparticle with a 1+ chargec. A particle with a 1- charge separated by 100 pm from aparticle with a 3+ charge16. According to Coulomb’s law, rank the interactions betweencharged particles from lowest potential energy to highestpotential energy.a. A 1+ charge and a 1- charge separated by 100 pmb. A 2+ charge and a 1- charge separated by 100 pmc. A 1+ charge and a 1- charge separated by 200 pm17. Which electrons experience a greater effective nuclear charge,the valence electrons in beryllium or the valence electrons innitrogen? Why?18. Arrange the atoms according to decreasing effective nuclearcharge experienced by their valence electrons: S, Mg, Al, Si.19. If core electrons completely shielded valence electrons fromnuclear charge (i.e., if each core electron reduced nuclearcharge by one unit) and if valence electrons did not shield oneanother from nuclear charge at all, what would be the effectivenuclear charge experienced by the valence electrons of theseatoms?a. K b. Ca c. O d. C20. In Section 8.6, we estimated the effective nuclear charge onberyllium’s valence electrons to be slightly greater than 2+.What would a similar treatment predict for the effectivenuclear charge on boron’s valence electrons? Would youexpect the effective nuclear charge to be different for boron’s2s electrons compared to its 2p electron? How so? (Hint:Consider the shape of the 2p orbital compared to that of the 2sorbital.)
21. Choose the larger atom from each pair.a. Al or In b. Si or N c. P or Pb d. C or F22. Choose the larger atom from each pair.a. Sn or Si b. Br or Ga c. Sn or Bi d. Se or Sn23. Arrange the elements in order of increasing atomic radius: Ca,Rb, S, Si, Ge, F.24. Arrange the elements in order of decreasing atomic radius: Cs,Sb, S, Pb, Se.
25. Write an electron configuration for each ion.a. O2- b. Br- c. Sr2+ d. Co3+e. Cu2+26. Write an electron configuration for each ion.a. Cl- b. P3- c. K+ d. Mo3+e. V3+27. Write an orbital diagram for each ion and determine if the ionis diamagnetic or paramagnetic.a. V5+ b. Cr3+ c. Ni2+ d. Fe3+28. Write an orbital diagram for each ion and determine if the ionis diamagnetic or paramagnetic.a. Cd2+ b. Au+ c. Mo3+ d. Zr2+29. Pick the larger species from each pair.a. Li or Li+ b. I -or Cs+c. Cr or Cr3+ d. O or O2-30. Pick the larger species from each pair.a. Sr or Sr2+ b. N or N3-c. Ni or Ni2+ d. S2-or Ca2+31. Arrange the isoelectronic series in order of decreasing radius:F-, O2-, Mg2+, Na+.32. Arrange the isoelectronic series in order of increasing atomicradius: Se2-, Sr2+, Rb+, Br-.33. Choose the element with the highest first ionization energyfrom each pair.a. Br or Bi b. Na or Rbc. As or At d. P or Sn34. Choose the element with the highest first ionization energyfrom each pair.a. P or I b. Si or Clc. P or Sb d. Ga or Ge
35. Arrange the elements in order of increasing first ionizationenergy: Si, F, In, N.36. Arrange the elements in order of decreasing first ionizationenergy: Cl, S, Sn, Pb.37. For each element, predict where the “jump” occurs for successiveionization energies. (For example, does the jump occurbetween the first and second ionization energies, the secondand third, or the third and fourth?)a. Be b. N c. O d. Li38. Consider this set of successive ionization energies.IE1 = 578 kJ>molIE2 = 1820 kJ>molIE3 = 2750 kJ>molIE4 = 11,600 kJ>molTo which third-period element do these ionization valuesbelong?
39. Choose the element with the more negative (more exothermic)electron affinity from each pair.a. Na or Rb b. B or Sc. C or N d. Li or F40. Choose the element with the more negative (more exothermic)electron affinity from each pair.a. Mg or S b. K or Csc. Si or P d. Ga or Br
41. Choose the more metallic element from each pair.a. Sr or Sb b. As or Bic. Cl or O d. S or As42. Choose the more metallic element from each pair.a. Sb or Pb b. K or Gec. Ge or Sb d. As or Sn
43. Arrange the elements in order of increasing metallic character:Fr, Sb, In, S, Ba, Se.44. Arrange the elements in order of decreasing metallic character:Sr, N, Si, P, Ga, Al.
45. Bromine is a highly reactive liquid while krypton is an inertgas. Explain the difference based on their electronconfigurations.46. Potassium is a highly reactive metal while argon is an inertgas. Explain the difference based on their electronconfigurations.47. Both vanadium and its 3+ ion are paramagnetic. Use electronconfigurations to explain this.48. Use electron configurations to explain why copper is paramagneticwhile its 1+ ion is not.49. If you were trying to find a substitute for K+ in nerve signaltransmission, where would you begin your search? What ionswould be most like K+? For each ion you propose, explain theways in which it would be similar to K+ and the ways it wouldbe different. Refer to periodic trends in your explanation.50. Where would you begin a search for a substitute for Na+ innerve signal transmission (discussed in Section 8.1)? Whations would be most like Na+? For each ion you propose,explain the ways in which it would be similar to Na+ and theways it would be different. Refer to periodic trends in yourdiscussion.51. Life on Earth evolved around the element carbon. Based onperiodic properties, what two or three elements would youexpect to be most like carbon?52. Which pair of elements would you expect to have the mostsimilar atomic radii, and why?a. Si and Ga b. Si and Ge c. Si and As53. Consider these elements: N, Mg, O, F, Al.a. Write the electron configuration for each element.b. Arrange the elements in order of decreasing atomic radius.c. Arrange the elements in order of increasing ionization energy.d. Use the electron configurations in part a to explain thedifferences between your answers to parts b and c.
54. Consider these elements: P, Ca, Si, S, Ga.a. Write the electron configuration for each element.b. Arrange the elements in order of decreasing atomic radius.c. Arrange the elements in order of increasing ionization energy.d. Use the electron configurations in part a to explain the differencesbetween your answers to parts b and c.55. Explain why atomic radius decreases as we move to the rightacross a row for main-group elements but not for transitionelements.56. Explain why vanadium (radius = 134 pm) and copper(radius = 128 pm) have nearly identical atomic radii, eventhough the atomic number of copper is about 25% higher thanthat of vanadium. What would you predict about the relativedensities of these two metals? Look up the densities in a referencebook, periodic table, or on the Internet. Are your predictionscorrect?
57. The lightest noble gases, such as helium and neon, are completelyinert—they do not form any chemical compoundswhatsoever. The heavier noble gases, in contrast, do form alimited number of compounds. Explain this difference in termsof trends in fundamental periodic properties.58. The lightest halogen is also the most chemically reactive, andreactivity generally decreases as we move down the column ofhalogens in the periodic table. Explain this trend in terms ofperiodic properties.59. Write general outer electron configurations (nsxnpy) for groups6A and 7A in the periodic table. The electron affinity of eachgroup 7A element is more negative than that of each correspondinggroup 6A element. Use the electron configurations toexplain this observation.60. The electron affinity of each group 5A element is more positivethan that of each corresponding group 4A element. Use the outerelectron configurations to suggest a reason for this behavior.61. Elements 35 and 53 have similar chemical properties. Basedon their electronic configurations, predict the atomic numberof a heavier element that should also share these chemicalproperties.62. Write the electronic configurations of the six cations that formfrom sulfur by the loss of one to six electrons. For those cationsthat have unpaired electrons, write orbital diagrams.63. Use Coulomb’s law to calculate the ionization energy inkJ>mol of an atom composed of a proton and an electron separatedby 100.0 pm. What wavelength of light would have sufficientenergy to ionize the atom?64. The first ionization energy of sodium is 496 kJ>mol. UseCoulomb’s law to estimate the average distance between thesodium nucleus and the 3s electron. How does this distancecompare to the atomic radius of sodium? Explain thedifference.
65. The heaviest known alkaline earth metal is radium, atomicnumber 88. Find the atomic numbers of the as yet undiscoverednext two members of the series.66. From its electronic configuration, predict which of the first 10elements would be most similar in chemical behavior to the asyet undiscovered element 165.67. Consider the series of elements: B, C, N, O, F.a. Which element has the highest first ionization energy?b. Which element has the largest atomic radius?c. Which element is most metallic?d. Which element has three unpaired electrons?68. Consider the series of elements: Na, Mg, Al, Si, P.a. Which element has the highest second ionization energy?b. Which element has the smallest atomic radius?c. Which element is least metallic?d. Which element is diamagnetic?
