Learning Objectives and Assessments for Chem 31A: Chemical Principles I 
1.Dimensional Analysis and Stoichiometry  
Apply chemical concepts in the laboratory, and use observations gained during experimentation to explain chemical phenomena
Apply dimensional analysis to guide problem solving
Know how to name ionic and covalent compounds for main group and transition metal elements.
Determine the number of moles or mass of product produced in a reaction that goes to completion.
Identify when a limiting reagent calculation is necessary.
Use experimental data to determine empirical and/or molecular formula
Apply stoichiometry to quantitatively and qualitatively make predictions and draw conclusions about chemical reactions
Write and balance chemical and net-ionic equations
Apply the concept of percent by mass and percent by volume when solving problems. 
Apply dilution formula (M1 V1    =  M2 V2 ) to calculate dilution volume or concentrations.
2.Gas Laws and Kinetic Molecular Theory
Use the ideal gas law (PV=nRT) to solve problems.
Sketch a graph of any two independent variables (P, V, n, R, T) of a gas 
Predict how any two independent variables of a gas (P, V, n, R, T) change if the others are held constant.
Use pressure to calculate force exerted by a gas
Calculate the pressure exerted by a liquid in a barometer
Explain why the ideal gas law best approximates the behavior of noble and diatomic gasses, and how intermolecular forces give rise to non-ideal behavior in gasses
Calculate the number density and mass density of a gas
Use gas laws with stoichiometry to analyze chemical reactions of gasses
Use partial pressures, mole fractions, and total pressure of a mixture of gasses to create systems of equations
Calculate vapor pressure 
Know how boiling point relates to vapor pressure
Calculate how vapor pressure will change as the pressure, volume, temperature, or amount are varied
Use the Clapeyron-Clausius equation to determine values for enthalpy of reaction, pressure, temperature, etc.
Sketch the distributions of velocity, speed, and kinetic energy as predicted by the Maxwell Boltzmann distribution 
Relate average kinetic energy to temperature, calculate root mean squared (RMS) velocity
Use Graham’s Law to calculate rates of effusion and make qualitative comparisons of effusion rates between different molecules
3.Chemical Reactions and Thermodynamics
Write and balance combustion equations for hydrocarbons, solve problems involving combustion
Identify endothermic and exothermic reactions.
Use the First Law of Thermodynamics to determine whether a system is open or closed.
Know the difference between systems and surroundings 
Identify the difference between state functions (e.g. enthalpy) and path functions (e.g. work) 
Calculate the work done by or on a gas.
Calculate the change in enthalpy associated with a phase change.
Calculate changes in energy, enthalpy, and temperature that result from a chemical reaction. 
Analyze calorimetry experiments at constant pressure and constant volume.
Use Hess’ Law to calculate heats of reaction based on enthalpies of formation.
4.Structure of the Atom 
Describe the structure of the atomic nucleus
Use atomic radius or other measurable dimensions of the atom to determine volume or other calculable properties.
Explain the difference between average atomic mass (formula weight) and the mass of a single isotope. 
Determine the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons in an atom, isotope, compound, or molecule.
Determine the formula weight of a compound given the abundances of its isotopes.
5.Electrons and Quantum Properties
Evaluate the shell model of atomic electronic structure
Determine which AO corresponds to a given set of quantum numbers.
Understand and write electron configurations for atoms (s, p, and d blocks only)
Determine the energy needed or released when transitioning to different energy levels.
Use the relationship between the frequency and wavelength and velocity (speed) of a wave to calculate any one (freq, wavelength or velocity) given the other two.
Explain how (and why) different atoms emit different wavelengths of light.
Know how the photoelectric effect can be used to assess binding energy.
Apply knowledge about properties of light for UV-Visible spectroscopy or for measuring absorbance with Beer-Lambert law.
Understand and apply the wave- and particle-like properties of light.
6.Periodic Trends  
Describe the electronic structure of atoms and molecules 
Explain how electronic structure gives rise to periodic trends (i.e.,recognizing isoelectronic species) 
Explain and predict periodic trends or atomic identity based on ionization energy, lattice energy, electronegativity, size, and effective nuclear charge
Given a set of data, explain any exceptions to an expected periodic trend based on electronic structure of the atom 
7.Bonding, Lewis Structures, and Molecular Shapes
Define covalent and ionic bonding.
Determine if a bond is polar or non-polar
Use Lewis structures to describe covalent bonding 
Determine whether a compound or molecule has multiple resonance structures 
Determine the hybridization of an atom from a Lewis structure 
Determine the 3D shapes of molecules and/or electronic geometry of an atom from a Lewis structure and VSEPR
Determine whether a molecule is polar (contains a permanent dipole moment)
Use experimental data (bond lengths, strength, angles) and/or resonance structures to explain or predict the 3-D structure of a molecule.
Identify sigma and pi bonds and describe the differences between their properties.
Draw and label orbitals, sigma bonds, and pi bonds on a molecule
Fill in a molecular orbital (MO) diagrams for diatomic molecules and calculate the bond order
Use a filled MO diagram to predict whether a molecule will be paramagnetic or diamagnetic.
Compare and contrast the valence bond model and molecular orbital model. 
8.Intermolecular Forces and Macroscopic Properties 
Know how intermolecular forces give rise to physical behavior
Know the four types of intermolecular forces and their relative strengths.
Predict which intermolecular forces are most consequential for the physical properties of a given compound.
Rank the boiling point, melting point, or vapor pressure of similar compounds based on the strengths of their intermolecular forces.
Know how hydrogen bonding gives rise to the unusual properties of water.
Define hydrophobic and hydrophilic and predict when a compound would be hydrophobic or hydrophilic.
Interpret a phase diagram to determine what phase change may occur for a given change in pressure or temperature
Determine a melting or boiling point at a given pressure using a phase diagram