1) We saw in section that the reaction of vinegar with baking soda
produces water, carbon dioxide, and sodium acetate. You
repeat the experiment, this time with an open glass jar that
has no lid. You add vinegar to the jar and find that the jar
and the vinegar together weigh 475 g. You add 5.0 g of
baking soda to the jar, stir, and leave the jar open as you wait
for the reaction to finish. After the reaction is complete, you
weigh the jar and the liquid inside again.
a) The mass of the jar and its contents together will be:

	a) Less than 480. g
	b) 480. g
	c) Between 480 g and 481 g.
	d) More than 481 g.
	e) Not enough information to say.

b) Provide a one-sentence explanation for your answer above.

c) You notice after the reaction that the solution is pink. What was the limiting reagent in
this reaction? Briefly explain why/how you were able to make that determination.

2) C3H10 is Nonexistane, a gaseous hydrocarbon fuel (and commercial flop).
a) Write a balanced combustion reaction for Nonexistane.

b) How many grams of Nonexistane must combust to release 1.00kg of CO2 into the
atmosphere?

3) Prof. Waymouth is scuba diving off the Channel Islands at 30.0 meters underwater,
where the total pressure is 4.00 atm and the temperature at 30.0 m is 15.0°C. His lungs
have a capacity of holding 6.00 liters of air.
He sees a shark and panics. Holding his breath (stupid idea, but he panicked), he
ascends quickly to the surface where the temperature of the water is 21.0°C. Tragically,
he dies because his lungs explode. A replacement must be recruited to teach Chem31a.
a) Why did his lungs explode?

b) Let us suppose his lungs had not exploded. If they were fully filled with 6.00L of air
under the water, what would have been the volume in his lungs at the surface where the
pressure is 1.00 atm?

4) Several years ago, Dr. Schwartz’s daughter managed to eat a large quantity of toothpaste.
Ingesting too much sodium fluoride from toothpaste can be quite dangerous because excess
fluoride ions can precipitate out the calcium ions in your blood, which play a critical role in
maintaining the electrical signals that control muscle contractions including your heart’s!
a) Write a balanced net ionic reaction for the formation of calcium fluoride precipitate, making
sure to include states of matter.

b) Luckily, when Dr. Schwartz contacted poison control, they determined that the quantity of
fluoride ions was not toxic, and her daughter could avoid any major issues by ingesting several
glasses of milk or yogurt – phew! If her daughter ingested 25% of a 160g tube of toothpaste that
contains 0.243% sodium fluoride by mass, how many mL of milk should she drink to react with
all the ingested fluoride? Milk generally has a calcium concentration of 8.6*10-3M.

5) 4.00L liters of nitrogen gas are reacted with 12.15 g of Li at 25.0°C and 2.00atm of pressure,
to produce 18.2g of Li3N. What is the percent yield for this reaction?

6 Li(s) + N2(g) → 2 Li3N(s)

