1. Very little was known about the structure of DNA until Rosalind Franklin applied the methods
of X-ray diffraction to examine crystal structures of DNA. Her work to obtain clearer X-ray
patterns of DNA molecules lead to the discovery of its now well-known helical conformation.
For this technique of X-ray crystallography to work properly, the X-rays used must have a
wavelength equal to the inter-atomic spacing of atoms in the crystal. This creates constructive
interference, which can be observed and used to calculate inter-atomic spacing with which it has
interacted.
a) X-rays are a form of ‘light’ (electromagnetic radiation), which has properties of both a
wave and a particle. In the case of X-ray crystallography, are we utilizing the wave-like
or particle-like properties of light to calculate the interatomic spacings? Based on the
description of X-ray crystallography above, give two details to support your answer.

b) An X-ray crystallography experiment finds constructive interference using X-rays of
frequency 2.14 x 1018s-1. Calculate the inter-atomic spacing in this crystal in nanometers.

c) Calculate the energy of ultraviolet light (wavelength = 300.0 nm) in MJ/mol.

d) The energy of X-rays with a frequency of 2.14 x 1018s-1 is 855MJ/mol. How do the
energies of UV versus X-ray radiation compare? Prolonged exposure to UV light causes
damage to our skin generally resulting in a sunburn. Use this information to briefly
explain why you generally wear a lead-lined apron whenever you get a dental X-ray.

2. In Lab, you were able to measure the absorbance of several different samples using your Phet
simulation. You return to the simulation and find the following information about nickel (II)
chloride.

a) Calculate epsilon for nickel (II) chloride.

b) Copper (II) sulfate has an epsilon value of 9.6M-1cm-1. A 2.50mL solution of copper (II)
sulfate, also in a 1.5cm cuvette, gives an absorbance of 2.24. How many mL of water
would you need to add to obtain a solution of copper (II) sulfate that will have an
absorbance equal to that of our nickel (II) chloride sample (i.e. 1.21) from part a?

3. A 2.000L flask of HCl(g) is connected to a
0.5000L flask of NH3(g) through a stopcock, as
shown below. The entire system is at constant
temperature of 42.00°C. The stopcock is opened
and the total pressure in the system is initially
3.877atm (we will assume no reaction happens
initially). You then notice a white powder begin
to form, as the ammonia and hydrochloric acid
react to form ammonium chloride salt. Upon completion of the reaction, all the
hydrochloric acid is used up and the final total pressure in the system is 0.7755atm. What is
the original pressure inside the 0.5000L flask of ammonia before the system was mixed?

4. The Hamster Escape Room! You are trapped in a room with a wise cracking hamster. He says
that the room is indestructible because it is made of Hamsterite (Hm), a very rare and dense
element. The hamster declares that to escape you must calculate the molar mass of Hamsterite.
Luckily, you know that Hamsterite metal reacts quickly with oxygen and nitrogen trifluoride
in the following reaction:

Hm(s)+3O2(g)+2NF3(g)→HmO3F6(s)+N2O3(g)

Thinking quickly, you construct a giant coffee cup calorimeter filled with 10.0L of water and
react 391.0 g of Hm(s) with excess O2 and NF3. You observe that the temperature of the
water in the coffee cup calorimeter increases from 23.500°C to 27.400°C. Assuming the heat
capacity of the calorimeter depends only on the 10.0L of water, which has a specific heat of
4.18 J/g·°C, calculate the molar mass of Hm(s) so that you can escape the hamster!
You can assume that solid Hamsterite is the most thermodynamically stable state for this metal in its
elemental form. Some additional heats of formation are given at right.



