1) Remdesivir was originally developed as an anti-viral treatment against Ebola, however it has
now found some effectiveness in the treatment of COVID-19. Below is the structure of
Remdesivir.

a) What is the hybridization at each of the numbered atoms (C1, C2, O3, N4, N5)

b) How many pi bonds are in Remdesivir? How did you determine this?

c) Drug molecules generally rely on intermolecular forces to interact with and bind to specific
pockets within a target enzyme or receptor. However, drugs must also be able to interact with
water to travel through the blood stream. List all types of intermolecular forces that would
be available between Remdesivir and water.

2) Chlorine can react with oxygen to form a variety of different compounds. In addition to
chlorate (ClO3-) that we discussed on last week’s quiz, it can also form perchlorate (ClO4-)
and chlorite (ClO2-).

a) Draw the Lewis Dot structures that best minimize formal charge, clearly indicating any non-
zero formal charges and resonance structures, for perchlorate (ClO4-) and chlorite (ClO2-).

b) What are the approximate bond angles for perchlorate (ClO4-) and chlorite (ClO2-)? Which
has the largest O-Cl-O bond angle? Briefly justify your answer with structures (above)
and/or brief explanation.

3) Aluminum has the following successive ionization energies:
IE1 = 578kJ/mol, IE2 = 1820kJ/mol, IE3 = 2750kJ/mol, IE4 = 11600kJ/mol,
a) Briefly explain why each subsequent ionization energy is larger than the previous (i.e. IE2
is greater than IE1, and IE3 is greater than IE3, etc).

b) Briefly explain why there is a larger jump between IE3 and IE4 (i.e. the gap is so much
larger than that between any of the previous ionization energies).

c) If you were to measure the successive ionization energies for a Chlorine atom, between
which two ionization energies would you expect to see a dramatically large jump in
energy as you did between IE3 and IE4 of aluminum?

4) Oxalate is a dianion with the formula C2O42-(aq). Several metal ions form insoluble precipitates with oxalate, a prominent example being calcium oxalate, the primary constituent of
the most common kind of kidney stones.

a) Draw two resonance structures of the oxalate dianion. Include non-zero formal charges.

b) What is the hybridization(s) of the carbon atoms in the oxalate dianion? What is the O-
C-O bond angle?

c) What is/are the bond order(s) for the C-O bonds in oxalate?

d) Will the oxalate dianion have a net dipole moment? Explain why or why not in one
sentence.

5) The superoxide anion (O2-(aq)) is a highly reactive oxygen species that is generated by the
immune system to kill invading micro-organisms. It is highly toxic in high concentrations,
so its biological concentration is highly regulated.

(a) Is the superoxide anion diamagnetic or paramagnetic?
Justify your answer with a brief explanation and/or
diagram. Recall that the σ2p MO is lower than the π2p
MO in oxygen molecules.

(b) The “Highest Occupied Molecular Orbitals” (HOMOs) in a molecule are those orbitals
highest in energy that are occupied by electrons.

What are the two highest occupied molecular orbitals in the superoxide anion (O2
-(aq))?

(pick two – assume a coordinate system where the O-O bond is along the x-axis)
i) 2px ii) 2s iii) 2s iv) 2py v) 2pz vi) 2py vii) 2px vii) 2pz


(c) What is the bond order of the superoxide anion?

6) Unsaturated Fatty acids, which contain at least one C=C double bond, are components of
vegetable oils. The double bonds react with oxygen over time making the fat go ‘rancid’ and
decreasing its shelf life Cooking oils are hydrogenated to make margarine, that is they are
reacted with H2 gas to remove most double bonds; the saturated fats are semi-solid (like butter)
and have a longer shelf life in the grocery store.

a) Biologically generated unsaturated fatty acids are always in the cis form (see picture above).
Impurities in hydrogenated oils will contain trans-fatty acids. Trans-fats have been shown to
be particularly harmful to humans as the difference in their 3-dimensional structure prevents
them from being efficiently processed by the body (see space filling models above). Why
can the C-C trans double bond not simply rotate to create the same 3-dimensional structure as
the C-C cis double bond? Briefly explain.

b) Calculate ΔH (in kJ) for the hydrogenation of 20.0g of CH3CHCHCH2COOH with 2.00L of
H2 gas to produce CH3CH2CH2CH2COOH at a temperature of 298K and pressure of 1.00atm.

